---
title: 'L03 Basics of R: Data Manipulation & Exloratory Analysis'
categories: [lessons]
tags: [manipulating data, exploratory analysis]
---

# Goals

Getting to know the basics of working with data: manipulating data, basic techniques of exploratory analysis

# Class:

* [`03_worksheets_data-manipulation-introduction.Rmd.zip`](../../files/03_worksheets_data-manipulation-introduction.Rmd.zip)
* [`04_worksheets_data-manipulation-continued.Rmd.zip`](../../files/04_worksheets_data-manipulation-continued.Rmd.zip)

**NB:** Original worksheets prepared by Lincoln Mullen, GMU (<https://dh-r.lincolnmullen.com/worksheets.html>)

## Topics

- Selecting columns (`select()`)
- Filtering rows (`filter()`)
- Creating new columns (`mutate()`)
- Sorting columns (`arrange()`)
- Split-apply-combine (`group_by()`)
- Summarizing or aggregating data (`summarize()`)
- Data joining with two table verbs (`left_join()` et al.)
- Data reshaping (`spread()` and `gather()`)

# Reference materials:

Consult relevant chapters from: 

* Healy, Kieran *Data Visualization: A Practical Guide*. Princeton University Press, 2018. ISBN: 978-0691181622. <http://socviz.co/>
* Hadley Wickham & Garrett Grolemund, *R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform, Visualize, and Model Data.* O’Reilly, 2017. ISBN: 978-1491910399. <https://r4ds.had.co.nz/>
* Wickham, Hadley. *Advanced R, Second Edition.* 2 edition. Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2019. <http://adv-r.had.co.nz/>

# Homework:

* Finish your worksheets and submit as described below.
* *Additional:* if you'd like more practice, you can use `swirl` library:
  * To install: `install.packages("swirl")`
  * To run: `library(swirl)`
    * Then: `swirl()`

## Submitting homework:

* Homework assignment must be submitted by the beginning of the next class;
* Email your homework to the instructor as attachments.
	*  In the subject of your email, please, add the following: `070184-LXX-HW-YourLastName-YourMatriculationNumber`, where `LXX` is the numnber of the lesson for which you submit homework; `YourLastName` is your last name; and `YourMatriculationNumber` is your matriculation number.