---
title: 'L09 Text Analysis III: Grouping Texts'
categories: [lessons]
tags: [text analysis, text similarities, tfidf, hierarchical clustering, kmeans clustering, topic modeling]
---

# Goals:

- major clustering techniques: hierarchical clustering, k-means clustering, topic modeling

# Software:

- R

# In Class

## Data: Richmond's Dispatch (1861-186)

In TSV format:

- [Year 1981](../../files/dispatch_1861_filtered.tsv)
- [Year 1982](../../files/dispatch_1862_filtered.tsv)
- [Year 1983](../../files/dispatch_1863_filtered.tsv)
- [Year 1984](../../files/dispatch_1864_filtered.tsv)

Topic models:

- [d1864_lda_better](../../files/d1864_lda_better.rda)
- [d1864_lda_vem_25t_better](../../files/d1864_lda_vem_25t_better.rda)
- [dispatch_lda_vem_better](../../files/dispatch_lda_vem_better.rda)

## Workbook

- Let's work with this workbook: [L09_Worksheet_TextAnalysis02.Rmd.zip](../../files/L09_Worksheet_TextAnalysis03.Rmd.zip). (For your reference, a knitted workbook can also be found [here](../../L09_Worksheet.html)).

# Topics?

## Example 1

*Thursday, March 27, 1862*

**LIGHT ARTILLERY**

—I am authorized by the Governor of Virginia to raise a Company of Light Artillery for the war. All those desirous of enlisting in this the most effective arm of the service, would do well to call at once at the office of Johnson & Guigon, Whig Building.

Uniforms and subsistence furnished.

A. B. GUIGON. mh 25—6t

## Example 2

*Wednesday, August 17, 1864*

**Royal Marriages.**

—There is a story circulated in Germany, and some in Paris, that the match between the heir-apparent of the Imperial throne of Russia and the Princess Dagmar of Denmark having been definitively broken off, another is in the course of negotiation between His Imperial Highness and the Princess Helens of England.

## Example 3

*Monday, June 22, 1863*

**NEWS FROM EUROPE.**

The steamship Scotia arrived at New York on Thursday from Europe, with foreign news to the 7th inst. The news is not important. The Confederate steamer Lord Clyde was searched by order of the British Government, but nothing contraband being found on board her she was permitted to sail. The Russians have been defeated near Grochoury by the Polish insurgents. The three Powers have sent an earnest note to Russia, asking for a representative Government, a general amnesty, and an immediate cessation of hostilities in Poland.

# Reference Materials

* *given in the workbook*

# Homework:

* *given in the workbook*

## Submitting homework:

* Homework assignment must be submitted by the beginning of the next class;
* Email your homework to the instructor as attachments.
	*  In the subject of your email, please, add the following: `070184-LXX-HW-YourLastName-YourMatriculationNumber`, where `LXX` is the numnber of the lesson for which you submit homework; `YourLastName` is your last name; and `YourMatriculationNumber` is your matriculation number.