---
title: 'LX Structuring Your Project'
categories: [lessons]
tags: []
---

# Section I: Data Description

The first section of your project should include a detailed description of your data. You can use the following template for the structure of this section. Think of this part as a log of your steps and of your thinking. This is also a sort of a checklist of issues you need to keep in mind when you start a project. Feel free to add more to it --- at the initial stage it is crucial to flag as many potential issues as you can possibly think of.

- What is the source of your data?
- In what form (or format) is it available? Provide an example (a screenshot can be used, if that is more convenient).
- How did you obtain it? (describe the procedure)
- Did/does data require any kind of preprocessing before it becomes usable for research purposes? Specifically, do you need to convert it into a different format? If yes, how are you going to do that?
- If yes, what kind of preprocessing have you done or planning to do? And, what kind of preprocessing should be done, ideally?
- What kind of metadata is available for this dataset? Are you planning to modify it in any way? Are any modifications desirable?
- What is the structure of your dataset? If your data is tabular, you can use R functions to generate summaries. However, you should also take a closer look at your data and provide some preliminary evaluations of values in each column—pay attention to their length, formatting, inconsistencies, etc. If you data is not tabular, describe it in appropriate manner. If a unit of your dataset is a text, provide some details on their structure (especially, if structure is relevant for your research questions). Do these texts similar in some way or completely different? Why should they be studied together? Etc.
- Does you data require normalization and/or cleaning? (In most cases, it does) What kind of normalization is necessary? For example, tabular data may require changing of formatting of values; OCR output may require some postcorrection. Most likely, your data is not tidy: is it formatted to contain one observation per row? Is it formatted to contain single values per cell? What kind of procedures are necessary to normalize/tidy your data?

Think of these steps as you plan, especially when it comes to cleaning/normalizing your data. Most likely you will not be able to fix everything in your data—which is totally fine within your final project—but it is important to keep close track of this process and remain honest with yourself.

# Homework:

* Finish Section I, and submit in the usual manner.

## Submitting homework:

* Homework assignment must be submitted by the beginning of the next class;
* Email your homework to the instructor as attachments.
	*  In the subject of your email, please, add the following: `070184-LXX-HW-YourLastName-YourMatriculationNumber`, where `LXX` is the numnber of the lesson for which you submit homework; `YourLastName` is your last name; and `YourMatriculationNumber` is your matriculation number.