---
title: 'L04 Basics of R: Data Visualization; Functions'
categories: [lessons]
tags: [data visualization, functions]
---

# Goals

Getting to know the basics of data visualization; writing simple functions (reusable, packaged code)

# Class:

* [`05_worksheets_ggplot2-introduction-MGR-mod.Rmd.zip`](../../files/05_worksheets_ggplot2-introduction-MGR-mod.Rmd.zip)
* [`06_worksheets_functions.Rmd.zip`](../../files/06_worksheets_functions.Rmd.zip)

## Topics

- Basics of using `ggplot2`
  - Basic `geoms` in ggplot2
    - Histogram
    - Lines
    - Bar plots
    - Faceting
  - Labels
  - Create your own plots
- Writing your own functions
  - Explanation of functions
  - Function calls
  - Function definition

# Reference materials:

Consult relevant chapters from: 

* Healy, Kieran *Data Visualization: A Practical Guide*. Princeton University Press, 2018. ISBN: 978-0691181622. <http://socviz.co/>
* Hadley Wickham & Garrett Grolemund, *R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform, Visualize, and Model Data.* O’Reilly, 2017. ISBN: 978-1491910399. <https://r4ds.had.co.nz/>
* Wickham, Hadley. *Advanced R, Second Edition.* 2 edition. Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2019. <http://adv-r.had.co.nz/>

# Homework:

* Finish your worksheets and submit as described below.

## Submitting homework:

* Homework assignment must be submitted by the beginning of the next class;
* Email your homework to the instructor as attachments.
	*  In the subject of your email, please, add the following: `070184-LXX-HW-YourLastName-YourMatriculationNumber`, where `LXX` is the numnber of the lesson for which you submit homework; `YourLastName` is your last name; and `YourMatriculationNumber` is your matriculation number.